Now all of us are busy developers,
we have limited time in the day.
We don't necessarily want to get a whole
other second career in data visualization,
maybe some of us do and that's awesome.
But maybe some of us just want to
kind of get up and running with
a data visualization as quickly as
possible, so how can we do that?
So that's why we're gonna
be using Observable today.
Observable is an in browser,
reactive programming environment
that is designed for
data visualization, it can be used for
lots of other things.
But if folks have heard of D3,
the creator of D3 Mike Bostock,
is also the creator of Observable, and
Observable actually started out
as a project called D3 Express.
So it was really built from the ground
up with the intention of making
data visualization as fast and
iterative a process as possible.
So we're gonna look at how Observable
works when we dig into the hands
on exercises, but essentially you have
some code cells they're called, so
you'll enter basically JavaScript.
In this case it's essentially,
we're just going to be using a declarative
library for
data visualization called plot.
And then, above that code you'll
see the latest iteration of
whatever code you have entered below.
And that also comes with these sort
of instant interactive inputs,
so essentially HTML inputs that are really
quick and easy out of the box that you
can then use to make interactive
visualizations as well.
So essentially, the reason that
we're using Observable is because A,
it's JavaScript, and so hopefully should
be pretty quick to get up and running in.
B, it is all in browser so you can tinker
with things right in your browser without
having to install anything or set
anything up in terms of dev environment.
And because it has this reactive,
it's sort of based on functional reactive
programming, it has this reactive
instant feedback environment.
And that makes it really easy to
iterate on your visualizations and
tweak them to get them
just how you'd like them.
And so, we're gonna be walking through
some step by step exercises later in
Observable.
We won't need to learn too much
about Observable and how it works,
I will explain just a couple of
features that we're gonna wanna know.
But there's also plenty of links in
the materials if you wanna dig deeper
with that.
Okay, and so
the first thing we're gonna need to do or
the zero thing, I guess I should
say that we're gonna need to
do if we want to visualize some data is,
have some data [LAUGH] to visualize.
So we're not gonna cover too much in
detail how to collect data, process it,
ingest it, because that could be a whole
other workshop in and of itself,
or not just workshop, but an entire
career of data engineering as it were.
But let's suffice it to say that for
working with data and
observable notebooks, much like working
with data in JavaScript in general,
there are a few different
ways we can do it.
One thing we can do is upload a local
file, maybe I have a JSON file or
a CSV file with some small
data set that I care about.
I can upload that to
an Observable notebook and
look at it right in the notebook.
So we're gonna look at some examples for
our projects here as sort of
an easy way to get started.
But also if you choose, you could sign
up for an account and kind of upload
your own files to be visualizing the data
set that you in particular care about.
The other thing we can do is connect
to files in the cloud like for
example Google Spreadsheets or sheets in
Microsoft OneDrive or something like that.
So, if you have a team that uses
kinda cloud providers like that,
you can connect to some files there, so
that you can really quickly show your boss
a very impressive visualization of your
team's quarterly data or whatever it is.
You can also connect to data
directly from databases.
So this is true in Observable,
you can connect to a database, maybe you
have a MySQL or Postgres database that
has some data you wanna visualize.
But similarly,
if you were building this into your apps,
you might have some connection to your
database on the server side that then
you're visualizing in the front end.
And finally, you might be fetching data
live from some API, whether internal or
external.
For example, we saw some data
earlier from the GitHub API, and
we're also gonna be looking
at some of that later.
So, again we're not I'm gonna be covering
in detail how to grab data from these
different sources, but there are links in
the materials if you wanna read more about
how to do that in Observable.
And then of course in terms of how
to do that in general in JavaScript,
it's gonna depend a lot on what
environment you are working on,
where your data lives,
what databases you have connected, etc.
So once you've got the data,
which is step zero,
then you're gonna want to get it
into a shape that is useful for
you and the questions that
you're trying to ask that data.
And that is often called data wrangling,
it could also be thought of as kind
of transforming data, reshaping data.
All of these words are kind of things you
might see around the data viz ecosystem.
But so in terms of data wrangling, what
we're trying to do here is we have some
raw data that came in
whatever format from,
let's say the API response or
the way it's stored in the database.
Or the way it was in the CSV file
my boss sent me, whatever it is.
But in order to answer the questions that
I'm interested in, I might need it in
a slightly different format,
a slightly different shape, as it were.
And so
that's where we're gonna be doing a lot
of processing on that data in
most of our day to day use cases.
Data wrangling is kind of a really
the fundamental prerequisite to being able
to make an effective visualization, is
getting the data into a shape that plays
nicely with the type of visualization to
answer the question that you care about.
So, in our case,
what we gonna be wrangling with today are
just some basic built in array methods.
So things like filter and
map, super handy for
some basic data wrangling, reduce as well.
So we're gonna take a look at one example
of just doing some minor data wrangling on
this, but again, data wrangling could
be its whole own workshop here.
And there are some other really
great tools and libraries for
kind of more advanced,
more complex data wrangling use cases.
And plot itself has a little bit of
that stuff baked in, so there are some
transformations that we'll be able to
do within our visualization library.
The same is true of D3, so if you go
on and get deeper into the world of D3,
you'll learn some more data
wrangling skills with that as well.
So if folks haven't worked much with array
methods like filter and map, I like to
explain them with what I have adapted
to this filter, map, reduce sandwich.
So filter is going to be our handy
dandy way of basically only looking
at the stuff that we care about.
So imagine, I've got an array
of let's say ingredients, and
I want to exclude from my final goal,
which is a beautiful visualized sandwich,
I want to exclude the veggies
I guess that I don't like.
And we'll just pretend for the sake of
this example that I don't like onions and
cucumbers, even though that is false for
me personally, but let's go with it.
So I can filter out the things
that I don't care about.
Now in real life when we're visualizing
things, it's probably not gonna be
vegetables unless we are working
in retail at a grocery store,
in which case it totally might be.
But what we're going to be doing is, for
example, filtering out let's say we're
trying to make a visualization
of different users, devices.
And we in this case,
don't care about desktop devices,
we're just interested in mobile, so
we might be filtering out data like that.
Then what we might be doing is
needing to map from let's say,
these whole veggies that we have passed
through our filter to sliced veggies.
So I might have some kind of chop
function or something like that,
that I'm gonna pass into my map method and
apply to each element in my data set.
So now,
instead of having these whole ingredients,
I end up with some chopped ingredients.
And then in some cases, we're gonna
need to aggregate our data, meaning pull
it together and create operations like
doing a sum of values in a data set or
averages and things like that.
And often that'll be baked into our
visualization tools, for example,
plot has some handy transformations that
are called we're gonna look at later for
doing things like creating aggregations,
like sums and counts.
But in other cases, we might need to
do that in our pre-processing step,
in our data wrangling step and
reduce is super handy for that.
So in this case, I might be taking
a bunch of sliced veggies, so elements in
an array and reducing them with some kind
of layer function into a single item,
a single sandwich where they're all
stacked together, smushed together.
And what we might be doing in a data
viz use case is, for example,
taking a bunch of similar observations and
summing up their values, for example.
So these are some of the questions
that you'll need to be asking yourself
before you even try to start visualizing
the data is, does the data that I have,
is it in a shape?
Is it in a format that is going to
make my life easier when I try to
paint it onto the screen?
If not, am I going to be able
to do the transformations
that I need to do at the visualization
step or are those things that I'm
going to need to do in the pre-processing
and the wrangling phase?
And so this is gonna be different
in different use cases.
But the point I wanna make here is just
that this is an important question to
be asking ourselves, do I need to do
additional wrangling on this data to get
it into a convenient format?
Okay, and so in terms of what
are convenient formats for
many visualization libraries and
plot in particular,
a format called tidy data is
a really nice format to work with.
So what is tidy data?
Tidy data means,
that you have one row in your data set for
each observation, and
you have one column for
each feature of that observation
that you care about.
And that means that every value that you
care about essentially gets
its own cell in the data set.
So let's take a look at an example
of some data that is not tidy.
Here I have some population data or
perhaps this is health data,
we have some cases per population, so
maybe I'm looking at some
cases of a particular disease.
And what we have is some
confounding rows here.
So I'll notice that I have two rows here
for each combination of a country and
a year.
So I have two rows for
Afghanistan in 1999, two rows for
Afghanistan in 2000, etc.
And that's because I have two
different types of observations.
One is for cases where I get a count here,
and another is for
population where I get a different count.
But the thing is,
this isn't tidy because again, we said
we wanna have one row per observation.
And we want every value that we
care about to get its own cell,
which means that every feature that
we care about, and in this case,
it seems like we care about the cases
observation and the population as well.
Each of those should really have its own
column so that we don't have this weird
type column where it's really just
selecting between two different features.
So instead,
if we turn this into tidy data,
what we get is a more concise table
like this, where we have one row for
each observation of a given
country in a given year.
And then we have two separate columns,
cases and population.
So instead of this sort of confusing
type column and the count column,
we'll have a value of cases and
a value of population.
So this is one example of we
might need to do some reshaping,
some wrangling to get data from
a non-tidy format into a tidy format.
But then again, the most ideal format for
your data is going to depend on what
question you're asking and
what visualization you're trying to build?
So the the crucial point is that we need
to be looking at this critically and
asking ourselves before we even
try to draw any colors or bars or
lines or what have you,
does my data have a convenient shape?
Once we've got data wrangled, then we
can actually do the data visualization.
Notice that we're several
steps in at this point.
Visualization is sort of the part that
comes after you've done all of this
housekeeping work.
And so the process of visualization,
we can sort of think of as
the process of transforming
values in the space of
the data set that I have.
Which are essentially going
to be numeric values on some
kind of domain, we might call it.
Some spread of numeric values,
transforming those into values
in the graphic on the screen.
So that might be pixels of width,
or it might be colors,
or it might be other features
of the visualization.
And we're going to use a function
that we call a scale to essentially
map from the values in the data set to the
values on the screen that we care about.
And so this is what that looks like.
Essentially, what we have is we
have some values in the data space.
Which again,
if we think back to kind of math class and
functions having a domain of input
values and a range of output values,
the data space is going to be our domain,
so our input values.
In this case, maybe we have
values going from 0 to 10,000,
that's not really the values here,
just for example.
And then we're going to transform
those via a scale function into values
in the visual space, the range or
the output of this scaling function.
So in this case, we might have a certain
number of pixels to work with on our
screen, or we might have a certain number
of colors in a spectrum that we wanna
use to visualize different values.
So this is really one of the core,
core, core things.
If there's only one thing
to take away from today,
it's essentially that visualization is
all about understanding how your scaling
functions map features from your data,
in the space in which the data exists,
to features in your visualization, in the
space in which the visualization exists.
So on the one hand, we have these abstract
values in the data set and then on
the other hand, we have these concrete
values on the screen, pixels and things.
Okay, so
that is what we're gonna be looking at.
Today is essentially how we
can map different features of
the data to different channels.
We're gonna learn that vocab
term in the visualization,
using these scales, as essentially
functions to do that transformation.